another front in the fast evolving
conflict between Israel and Hamas is the
one found online thisinformation is
running rampant across social media
where Millions turned to get realtime
updates I met the very real imagery are
floods of fabricated videos and photos
spread by both fake and real accounts
the companies behind giants like
Facebook X and Tik Tok say they've taken
additional steps to tackle
disinformation around the violence but
the EU has reprimanded social media
compan
for not doing enough and about all that
we can now speak to Caitlyn chin Rothman
she's with the center for strategic and
international studies where she
researches the impact of technology on
geopolitics and Society Caitlyn good to
see you lots of people these days
getting their information on social
media with tensions running so high are
these platforms equipped to Bear the
responsibility that
entails thanks Nicole first of all no I
don't think that platforms are equipped
to Bear the responsibility of content
moderation and there's a reason why the
EU has already reached out to X meta and
Tik Tok about all of the disinformation
and harmful content that flowed online
over the past two weeks um we're seeing
that platforms don't have the resources
to detect very large amounts of content
especially in non-language English
languages I will say that platforms are
in a very difficult position partly due
to the very very large volume of
information that's flowing but also due
to the fact that platforms are making
realtime decisions in very short periods
of time they don't always operate with
all of the information so it's not
always possible for them to verify the
claims that are flowing um so there are
both technical but also normative
challenges that social social media
platforms are facing right now and how
are both sides in this conflict using
social media to shape views of the war
we've seen um both Hamas and the Israeli
government use post on social media
quite often Hamas has been posting on a
platform called telegram Which is less
popular in the United States and the EU
but more popular in other parts of the
world like Russia and Ukraine um
telegram has very loose content
moderation policies which has allowed
Hamas to post very graphic or violent
images from its initial attack on
October 7th um Israel as well has been
quite active on social media it's been
posting on X formerly known as Twitter
Instagram and other platforms it's
posted photos of Israeli families and
individuals who were impacted by the
attack Israel has also posted a pretty
high-profile audio clip of what it
claims to be Hamas operatives discussing
the bombing of the hospital so both
sides have been very active in using
social media and trying to shape a
narrative spread a message and I would
also just add that both both sides are
trying to reach the the International
Community so Their audience isn't just
Israel it's not just Palestine it's the
entire world I want to look a little
closer at telegram uh that you just
mentioned because it's used by Hamas not
only to spread propaganda but also to
recruit new members now this is an
internationally recognized Terror
organization uh by much of the West at
least can the platform be held
accountable for
that so it's very difficult in in the
United States at least we have very
loose content moderation laws so
platforms are generally not held
accountable for third party content that
users upload now that is different in
other countries especially the EU which
recently passed the Digital Services act
um and the online service Online safety
bill in the United Kingdom is about to
come into effect um now telegram has not
seen as much regulatory attention from
the EU or the UK I think partly because
it's just not as popular popular in e in
either jurisdiction but I think going
forward I I would expect governments to
become more interested in how telegram
operates especially if we continue to
see Violent extremist content emerge on
these Platforms in real-time war
situations Caitlyn you study the impact
of technology on geopolitics how could
social media and the content posted on
it potentially shape the course of this
War I think it affects everything I mean
users people all around the world
millions of people are going to social
media to find out information about wars
to respond and react in real time which
means that the content moderation
decisions that these platforms make are
very powerful they affect how so many
people view conflicts so I I I
definitely think that um social media
also affects how actors act for example
extremist actors are finding that they
can gain a lot of attention get a lot of
Engagement from posting very violent or
graphic content and when they get those
reactions it's like instant
gratification right um it reinforces
polarizing views so I think we're seeing
social media change both how people View
and access information but we're also
seeing social media change how the
extremist actors themselves are playing
out the conflict that's tremendously
interesting stuff cait Linton Rothman
with the center for strategic and
International studies thanks for
that thanks Nicole for having
me